we have a patient for whom the root
cause of his cholesterolemia
was identified as being that he golfed
too much
and how is that a medical diagnosis it
makes no sense right so here's what was
going on
Kashif Khan welcome to the show it's a
pleasure man could be here dude I'm very
excited so what is the things that
people can do on a daily basis if they
want to stop aging or even reverse it if
possible so first of all what's aging so
aging is the literal meaning is
degradation of the cells your cells
start to unravel the DNA literally
unravels on packs and the physical
manifestation of that is you know white
hair sagging skin cells are degrading so
what causes that
inflammation
lack of detoxification and poor
oxidation so these three areas are the
key factors and why cells get harmed and
they age and then outward they use start
to age
so the answer isn't here's what
everybody should do it's more that the
answer is personalized here's what you
should do and what you should do you
should do meaning I could tell somebody
that cardiovascular activity is what you
need and to somebody else that's the
reason they would Age
yeah see that's crazy so what angle we
should probably get into the genomics of
it all so what's the difference between
genetics which I think most people are
familiar with and genomics we'll start
there and then we'll get into how it
could be possible that for some people
running is the right thing and other
people
will look hagered because of doing it so
genetics so genetics was rooted in our
Healthcare model which is respond to
illness right pill for a nail you're
sick we'll come help you why did you get
sick to begin with that's functional
genomics just like there's medicine and
there's functional medicine medicine is
go break yourself and I'll fix you maybe
functional medicine is why did you get
sick what was the root and let's deal
with that so you don't get sick or we
reverse the illness and this applies to
chronic disease and to aging when it's
acute in nature broke your arm have a
terminal cancer yes run to the hospital
and get fixed all this other stuff which
is 90 of our health care budget does not
need to happen
and what we've understood is that if you
understand biology right first then
reverse engineer what genes drive those
processes it's not about
your genome says you have an 80 chance
of Alzheimer's it's why did 20 not get
it what were they doing right their
environment choices their new
nutritionist choices that that's
Healthcare studying the healthy to teach
those habits to prevent disease or you
know not to to slow down aging or be
optimal in your energy better sleep
whatever it is that you want to do
okay so now the personalized medicine I
think is the future that seems
undeniable in terms of we're all
slightly different and so assuming that
we all have the same start Point as a
mistake however it also seems to me like
they're pretty Universal factors so what
are before we drill into like what are
the things you need to understand about
your own genetic makeup what are things
at a broad level that like I would have
thought until I started researching I
would have said everybody should be
exercising right and if somebody had
said oh I run every day I'd be like word
that's amazing if somebody said I was
lifting weights every day I'd be like
word that's amazing I wouldn't have
thought that there are some people that
are going to get themselves in trouble
by running so if that isn't one of the
universal recommendations what are even
if it's a super narrow set what are the
as close to Universal as we're going to
get I would say the the thing that
stands out the most that is the least
applied is understanding environmental
health and why do I say this the first
thing we talked about was the health of
your cells right the biggest threat to
the health of our cells is the current
environment we live in our fine
environment like SO meetings in the air
or what I eat all of that so every so
how do things enter your body you
breathe them and you eat them primarily
also Through Your Skin but primarily
these two functions the way you do that
that first line of defense here to block
and prevent also in your gut some of us
do those things differently for example
me the genetic instruction to actually
defend the gut from toxins coming in in
the food that I'm eating I don't even
have that Gene
so forget about what version or what
variant or how well I don't do that
process
so you wonder why I had eczema and
psoriasis and autoimmune conditions and
because I was eating just like everybody
else
so the reality of Who We Are
genetics are 200 000 years old by the
way so when you think about our
ancestors and let's do what grandma did
you are the same of people of 200 000
years ago our genome hasn't changed so
imagine the reality of how we live that
blip in time the last you know
industrialized couple hundred years
agriculture is 10 000 years old versus
the 200 000 years of habits that we're
wired for and you wonder why chronic
disease is so prevalent that you just
expected to have cancer and
cardiovascular conditions because the
choices that even the options are not
the right options
right the environmental option of the
pesticides in your grass the the drying
agents that dry up the wheat so they can
store them that shouldn't be an option
right and also and you wonder why
everybody's so sick this is why so
that's the one thing that I would say if
you can understand environmental
exposure and threats that will take you
far okay so we can probably spend a lot
of time on this and it's probably worth
the time but I want to make sure that we
give people breadcrumbs to follow
so understanding genetics I'm going to
give it to people really simplistically
fill in any gaps that I leave out so
genetics are are a literal instruction
manual for your body oh God that's so
generic but the that entire instruction
manual is inside of every cell but only
certain parts of the instruction manual
are made are Unwound so that that cell
type can read it so the part of the
genome that has to do with the Heart Is
Made available to cells that are heart
cells the part of the genome that has to
do with the eyes made available to cells
in the eye
and part of aging is that the wrong
parts of the genome get exposed to that
cell so you get D differentiation so eye
cells start am I a skin cell am I a
brain cell my heart cell what the hell
am I and so part of all of the
environmental insults is that it's
exposing the wrong part of the
instruction manual to that cell
but there's also the complexity which
you were alluding to a minute ago
all of us have misspellings paragraphs
out of order paragraphs that are missing
or I know in your case I didn't even
know this was possible that there are
pages that are missing so there are
things your body should do that and I'm
sure this is true for all of us I just
happen to know yours because you've
talked about it there are things that
your body is supposed to be doing that
it does not have instructions for
and when you didn't know that that was
the case for you the symptoms that you
were encountering
migraines nausea I think there was
eczema like all kinds of stuff it was
all mysterious once you understood that
you were missing that page was like okay
now I know what's going on walk people
through that story as an illustration of
that point yeah so you're you're right
on right so and that's the most eloquent
description I've ever heard you know so
it's amazing that you've understood that
level essentially what we're saying is
here's your human instruction manual
here's a code that's telling yourselves
and like you said other micro you know
processes beyond the cell what to do and
each cell knows what page to read to do
its job as a liver cell or a heart cell
Etc
if you have spelling mistakes or Pages
missing or bad code
you're not going to do the job well so
our assumption is here's how the
cardiovascular system works here's how
the hormone system works we understand
those things our assumption is we're all
doing those things the same way
we're not right we all have broken code
missing code we have exponentially
beneficial code and we overdo the job
sometimes which can cause autoimmune
conditions right the same thing that is
protective can end up hurting you if you
do too much right so now all of a sudden
you can start to read that book
and you can understand that I'm missing
a page like myself right so you underst
the page you're missing so there's the
glutathione pathway which is what it's
the main drive your of your detox
process so we know when we drink alcohol
your liver helps clear the nonsense out
and you keep whatever you want to keep
in right so some of us don't do the same
in terms of how do we react to alcohol
why because that process we don't do the
same the version of that Gene it's
possible to have what's called a copy
number variation how many copies of the
gene do you have the thing that you said
you didn't know
if you don't have the gene you don't do
that job
so how are they even supposed to cope
with the alcohol or the pollution from
you know traffic or from the pesticides
you put in your lawn we have a patient
for whom the root cause of his
cholesterolemia
was identified as being that he golfed
too much
and how is that a medical diagnosis it
makes no sense right so here's what was
going on
like me he was missing certain detox
genes didn't even have them and he would
golf four days a week and he was golfing
in Canada where I'm from where the
regulations around what you're allowed
to use is a little lack because we have
a Long Winter it's over what that's to
make the golf course so pretty and
beautiful got it pesticides got it right
how do you guys diagnose him with your
playing too much golf Yeah by looking at
his genes you see a lack of detox you
ask him about so this is all in the
context of environment you ask them what
do you do he's like I don't know man I'm
so healthy all I do is Golf and i e
right golf yes tell me more exactly and
then you start to then you ask well why
would that lead to cholesterolemia why
at the age of 38 he was actually a
clinician by the way why the age of 38 a
clinician that has studied everything
that you need to study in University
cannot get his cholesterolemia under
control it was taking Lipitor number one
prescribed drug
we can determine the quality of your
Hardware your your literal arterial
walls the inner lining of your blood
vessels he had the worst possible
quality meaning instead of this
stainless steel resilient material it
was from the genetic standpoint from a
genetic standpoint okay so you could
look at his genome and go bro like if
you're not really careful you're going
to have a heart disease just just at a
gene starting there yeah that being said
he wasn't born sick right it doesn't
mean he's going to get it you have to
make the wrong choices and he did what
he did was he golfed four days a week in
Canada where there's a lot of toxins in
the grass breathing this stuff in for
four or five hours at a time without any
detox regimen as part of his daily
routine all of a sudden there's this
free-flowing toxic insult in his blood
causing the inflammation to this bad
quality Hardware that he has which is
sole prone to inflammation and that's
one of the things we said earlier is one
of the roots of Aging so what is the
body's response to when you have
inflammation here in the inner lining of
the arteries which are such an important
part of your body it will actually
deploy cholesterol as a hormone to
reduce the inflammation
when cholesterol meets toxicity it
actually hardens and it gets deposited
and you get that buildup we can actually
determine genetically how well you
transport lipids there's that HDL LDL
process you're supposed to send it to
liver some people don't do that so well
and that's another compound layer why he
would get this so fast
so we start to unpack his habits and say
you know stop the gulf or the other dial
you turn is start detoxifying take the
right supplements eat the right foods
keep the Habit okay you're going to keep
buffing then you also need to do this or
stop the thing that's causing you the
problem or hopefully a little bit of
both
yeah so this is crazy okay your own
story which I find fascinating you're in
what an auto shop what was going on
paint fumes so you guys had a marketing
company yeah yeah so that that was in
the same building with somebody kicking
off my passion was always helping
startups grow I loved it I loved that
zero to some level and then pass it on
and I did them many times for other
people right
um me and my business partner
we had a very different experience
where three four years into our office
environment like you said eczema
migraines which was probably the worst
part he used to drive me home and I
literally opened the door and vomit out
the door in the middle of the highway
and then keep going
uh psoriasis which is different than
eczema eczema is inflammation psoriasis
as autoimmune and at this point you've
no you're not making the connection
between I smell the fumes and I start
feeling bad no well I didn't even smell
the fumes right I didn't know what all I
knew was I felt horrible and you just
believe you go to the doctor which I did
and you start getting a pill and you
believe this is part of life this is
part of aging you get sick as you age
and I believe that I truly believed it
until I asked the question why
right I'm 42 now and I was 38 at the
time I said why now all of this stuff
happening at the same time I must be
doing something wrong I want to like
really Bang a Drum here for people so
modern medicine is amazing acute care is
absolutely necessary but
if you're having headaches and you just
go how do I get rid of the headache and
you never ask why do I have a headache
you will end in a dust viral so I went
through this with my wife and it was
Insanity yeah finally figuring out what
was causing the problem but until you
get to the root cause of it you're
you could be exacerbating the symptoms
you're certainly only masking them you
have not addressed the root cause and
something I've heard you say is that all
these things you think the spoke
problems if you deal with the Hub issue
all the spokes go away that's what
happened to me I've been healthy before
I tested myself for biological aging at
that time when I started to learn that
there was a different way to control my
health and at 38 I was 43 internally so
you can do an aortic stiffness test
trying to understand how much you've
aged internally I'm now 42 and my
biological age is 33. wow so you
literally went back to the reverse
biological clock is that the Horvath
clock looking at literally you can use
so yes telomere length which my aging
paused it hasn't increased it actually
so a telomere is like these caps at the
end of your DNA and it's kind of like
wear and tear you can determine how much
damage you've done to your DNA and that
gives you some indication of Aging this
is understanding your cardiovascular
health how much stress have you put your
cells under that unraveling we were
talking about you can measure it
specifically with this pulsory area
stiffness test it's very easy you do it
on your finger so when you're saying
your age went backwards you're the
elasticity of your aorta exactly
improved yeah and the best way to paint
this picture that you're talking about I
see this cube in front of us right so
imagine if I came to you and this is
just to help people understand and this
is exactly what I went through and what
actually most people are going through
if this was a fishbowl and I came and
presented you this gift of this fish
and let's call this fish sushi so
Sushi's on the ball right and I
presented sushi in toxic polluted water
you instinctively would know let's get
her out of there and put her somewhere
else right but if you left her in there
what would happen
you would expect things like eczema
things like mood and behavior banging on
the glass life is miserable eventually
cancer right maybe cardiovasculars
everything would start to go we know
that already right
if you then put her into the healthy
water
great but what do we actually do you
leave her in the water give her a pill
for the eczema a pill for the migraine
chemo for the cancer and you stay in
that environment that's why I mean that
environmental health is our biggest
threat the things that we're doing and
the things that we're amongst are not
what we're designed for we don't have
the genetic code to cope with our
reality we literally this Fishbowl is
our reality so you have to do two things
one of two things or maybe both improve
capacity take the right supplements for
you based on what you don't do well
genetically and we're not all the same
or remove yourself from this environment
and I did both right I'm healthier than
I've ever been I don't get sick anymore
I used to miss work every couple of
weeks I just I am healthier than I've
ever been and every way imaginable right
so that's exactly what would happen if
you took Sushi from here put her here
give her some time healing that is
Health right dropping pills in there
that's not Health yeah so this is the
hardest thing about health
is it's really hard to know what is
causing the problem and like even myself
I know that it's going to be environment
or something I'm eating right like it
just or sleep but I like there's a
pretty narrow band of things that you
know it's going to be one of those
things but even though there's only a
handful of things those things are so
complicated the fact that you you didn't
even smell the fumes that were creating
the problem that's terrifying because
now you have one less cue to pick up on
so this actually happened to me a while
ago maybe a year ago now
um I was having tremendous brain fog I
felt tired all the time I couldn't focus
in the way that I normally do and I was
just like what is going on like this is
so weird I could not figure it out
couldn't figure it out and I honestly
was like am I just overwhelmed with
stress do I not like what I do anymore
like what's going on
and I thought okay if somebody came to
me and described these symptoms what
advice would I give them and I'm like
it's something you're eating yeah and
I'm like but I'm not I know my diet is
so clean there's nothing I'm eating
that's problematic and I'm like I would
still tell the person whatever you're
eating a lot of stop eating it and see
what happens I happen to be eating a lot
of pecans at the time so I thought well
pecans are the only thing I'm eating a
lot of let me just cut them out and see
what happens 72 hours later I felt
perfect yeah I was like what the [__]
cons like how is this possible yeah it
seemed so unreal because I thought of
pecans I mean they were raw pecans first
of all let's start with that so it's not
even like they were
um they were being processed in some
crazy way but then I tell my sister can
you believe this is the weirdest thing
ever I was having all this brain fog I
stopped eating pecans and now I'm fine
she's like oh yeah I can't eat pecans
either if I eat them I get migraines and
I was like what I'm like it that was so
weird to me yeah and to one to think
that it is a knowable thing because my
sister has the exact same it didn't
manifest exactly in the same way but
that it was a problem for her that she
could track back as well but that it was
so delayed and this is my real point
with health and what you eat and what
you're exposed to is so terrifying it's
like steering a boat when you're in a
car the second you turn the car moves in
a boat you turn the wheel and three
seconds later it starts to move and so
it's very difficult to steer if you're
inexperienced the same is true of Health
you may not like it took 72 hours for
the symptoms to go away so if I had
stopped eating for 24 hours and I
thought nope no change and started
eating it why do you leave them out if
it doesn't make a difference and started
eating them again yeah then it goes on
forever and now I can't make the
connection you know the exact same thing
happened to me by the way and often when
it comes to Foods it's not always the
food it's the processing even even
something like a pecan where you think
it's not processed there's something
there and let me give an example there's
a drink that I like I like carbonated
drinks bro right me too yeah now I
figured how do I get something with some
flavor that doesn't have any sugar in it
so I found one with stevia and according
to Ben Greenfield no problem right so I
started drinking it uh and I I had minor
headaches that week the next week I
started turning into brain fog right and
this is what I said I'm doing something
that's causing an inflammatory response
what is it and I didn't lean on this
because it seemed so clean and healthy I
had this pre you know I just thought it
was great but anyways I read carefully
so there's the water there's Stevia but
there was a natural flavor right natural
means it's from a plant or an animal
which seemingly should be fine right
what does it take to derive a natural
flavor and put it into your food between
50 to 100 chemicals whoa yeah the
average is 70. 70 chemicals so take a
natural flavor get it into the material
that it needs to where it actually is
usable in food but none of that is
listed as an ingredient because it's not
an ingredient it's a processing chemical
it's not on the package you don't get to
see the 70 things you just ingested
right right so I stopped drinking it
like yourself after the third day
symptoms were gone because the
inflammation Cycle takes some time to
recover you're inflamed right that would
have led to mood issues
neurological inflammation that would
have led to arterial inflammation just
like my friend that had the golf problem
I don't have the best quality arterial
lining right so
it just depends how much inflammation
are you getting from what sources you
got to cut it all out and you can feel
amazing
yeah man this is uh aging is a big deal
aesthetically but also from a
performance standpoint and getting that
stuff right how much of this can we move
backwards so your arterial flexibility
you actually move backwards it got more
elastic again which is phenomenal so
I'll just throw out a PSA you are what
you eat yes and you are what you ate ate
so if your cows are eating Skittles yeah
which I can't believe is a real thing
yeah uh then you're eating meat yeah
where the Skittles at a minimum would be
stored in the fat but even just like
from uh you're turning over I think
every cell in the body turns over what
every 12 years maximum and most of them
are turning over a lot faster than that
so if you're ingesting something then
whatever those cells are made of you're
going to be intaking
and so you can move your things like
arterial flexibility back but can you
with the telomeres I'm much more
familiar with the Horvath clock and like
I don't know does that matter as much
because arterial flexibility the things
we're looking at that's looking at
epigenetic expression right so what does
that mean your genome is here's the
instructions you have here's what your
cells are being told what to do your
epigenetic expression is now based on
your environment nutrition lifestyle
factors the load you put on this DNA
some of those Gene instructions may be
sped up or slowed down you eat a
blueberry it does something to your
genes a specific Gene perhaps right
women know that if you use curcumin and
turmeric it slows certain or dim for
example it helps them with their hormone
imbalances that was dim it's a
supplement that is in any female
menopause or hormone estrogen dominance
supplement so if I have your DNA I can
tell you exactly how your hormone
Cascade looks meaning like yourself just
by looking at you Androgen dominant a
lot of testosterone not a lot of
estrogen and good clean androgens not
the toxic DHT you don't clear it you
also don't you know you don't convert
like I said earlier right so it's clear
from your phenotype your manifestation
of the genes so all of a sudden you can
be very clear about that stuff and then
if somebody like yourself is Android and
dominant
they can start to pick at that and say
well now what problems does that cause
it's a benefit to you you're going to
live a little longer you're going to
have a little more Vitality you're not
going to age as fast right but it could
lead to the truth is hitting your career
goals is not easy you have to be willing
to go the extra mile to stand out and do
hard things better than anybody else but
there are 10 steps I want to take you
through that will 100x your efficiency
so you can crush your goals and get back
more time into your day you'll not only
get control of your time you'll learn
how to use that momentum to take on your
next big goal to help you do this I've
created a list of the 10 most impactful
things that any High achiever needs to
dominate and you can download it for
free by clicking the link in today's
description alright my friend back to
today's episode
prostate issues right it could lead to
if you were to God forbid against
something like covid you might get a
little more sick than other people whoa
myocarditis right why is it that so many
young men are that's the outcome of
injecting something because of what's
happening with their testosterone level
then why not every young man only some
right because their hormone paths are
different the genes that are instructing
what they do with their hormones are
different
so if you are in that bucket where you
net out like yourself a lot of clean
androgens myocarditis is a real risk
right where it isn't for some other
people and that's why I'm saying that
the very first thing I said is
personalization any question you ask the
answer isn't the same for all of us the
same thing that could be highly
beneficial for somebody first thing we
talked about cardiovascular activity
right let's get into that
your oxidative pathway what happens when
you're running you're taking in more
oxygen
all the cells in your body take in
oxygen and nutrition to create energy
right and in that process of using
oxygen to make energy you also create an
oxidant and that oxidant is a free
radical it's toxic it causes
inflammation
your cells is a gene called sod2 which
is meant to clear this from the cell so
it's meant to go find it get rid of it
put it into the blood and then your
detox Pathways catch it grab it send it
to the liver and then you're done if you
don't do that well
then it's kind of like having a
fireplace with no chimney
and the soot is just
piling up and you're running on the
treadmill and that oxidation is choking
yourself and aging it faster creating
that inflammatory state that you
shouldn't have because you're doing
something that is misaligned to your
genetic capacity right if you also don't
detoxify well it's also now causing
inflammation in other parts of your body
so that thing could be the root cause of
your cholesterolemia because again an
inflammatory insult to bad Hardware
right or that thing if you deal with
oxidation really well
then you do get the cardiovascular
benefit because your cells are not
choking in oxidation
and it's going to add 10 years to your
life
right so the habit misaligned to your
genome equals problems a habit of line
to your genome equals life extension
Jesus man so
we get so much advice
and from diet eat like this I remember
as a kid my dad was very overweight and
the doctor was like if you don't change
your diet you're going to die and their
advice though was to basically go high
carb low fat yeah whoops so not great
advice the good news is that my dad is
hyper disciplined so he just restricted
the life out of his calories and ended
up losing a lot of weight awesome
um but
that is just thankfully in fact I'd be
so curious to see if you can actually
see willpower in the the genetics
because man I have me some willpower
yeah like that is for sure yeah and I
think my dad probably does as well
watching him like go
because there's the book
um
what's it called oh God it's something
about live or die something like that I
forget and it it tracks people and can
they make the very simple decisions that
they need to elongate their life and 95
of people if all they have to do is take
a single pill once a day for the rest of
their life to elongate their life by
like five or ten years they don't do it
yeah and I'm scandalized by that yeah
but so I said this is this is my
favorite part about what we do and I'm
not a scientist I'm not a clinician I
was sick and I found a solution and I
built a company around it right because
I just felt everybody needed it
um the thing that I personally have
focused on building that I found was the
most broken in genomic interpretation
was the brain and mood and behavior most
people didn't believe that there was an
answer so that that belief that 99
people won't take the pill
it said 99 of people were given the
prescription in a way that doesn't align
to their thinking they will all take the
pill if you understand how they think
now you're in my zone yeah how is that
possible so take me for example
the dopamine pathway which you're
familiar with pleasure and reward right
that chemical allows you to feel these
two things we understand biologically
how that happens and we understand what
Gene instructs each step so first of all
uh sensorial type activity happens in
three phases the anticipation you know
what's coming you smell the tasty PDS of
the steps of dopamine these are the
steps of dopamine and most other sort of
feelings right anticipation of the
feeling you know it's about to happen as
long or short as it takes then it
happens you're in the moment and then
you have to clear it you have to come
back to normal so that's clear the
neurochemistry the actual dopamine from
this yes so the way I anticipate and
bind experience my ability to bind my
sensors the actual receptors are very
sparse so this Gene called drd2 which
determines the density of those
receptors and I'm slim to none okay I
want to walk people through this this is
important it's the same with insulin and
Insulin yeah exactly yes so you have a
cell yeah and I I'm going to describe it
what I think is true but jump in if I'm
inaccurate so you have a cell on the out
outside of the cell are receptors
basically I imagine them as like little
grabbing hands or locks and you've got
dopamine floating around as a thing to
be grabbed or Keys have whatever analogy
you prefer and they if you have a lot of
receptors there's a lot of grabbing
hands boom they grab the dopamine
there's a lot of locks for that key to
unlock if you have very few receptors
which it sounds like you do even if
there's a lot of dopamine present in the
system there's just not a lot of things
trying to grab the dopamine and so you
could take your blood and be like word
you've got all the dopamine dopamine is
not your problem exactly yeah but in
reality
is the problem but the third part so
presence of dopamine ability to bind
dopamine or any chemical and then
clearing it out of the system have it
okay those are the three important now I
have the minimal ability to bind so when
I experience or feel it's way down here
right the maos and other gen Gene that
breaks it down and I have the fastest
possible Mao comp produces A protein
that helps now clear that broken upper
tablet I have the fastest possible pump
so when the way I experience the world
is pleasure and reward our way down here
and it lasts that long it's done before
it started
so I have three potential outcomes and
this is exactly why I said the reason
why they don't take the pill is that the
prescription is misaligned to their
thinking
for me if I'm not doing king or they are
experienced their perspective perception
the way they're perceiving what's
happening right so the way I perceive
the world sucks
I'm depressed right I don't get to enjoy
and I don't feel a reward for real for
real you feel that most days or you
found a way to combat it if I don't go
down the path of reward or pleasure I
could very EAS very easily become
addicted because when I do feel that
pleasure hit from anything could be good
or bad I need more and I need more and
I'll structure my day around it and it
becomes the core Hub again of all these
problems if I go down the pleasure path
dopamine also Powers reward I might go
down that path and then also and they
become entrepreneurial and I take big
risks and I do stupid things that nobody
else will do like walking away from my
startup company and building a genomics
company which I have no business doing
right so that's where by the way I've
experienced all three
and why is that important because the
outcome here's your biological pathway
here's the genes and a structure I can
predict your behavior and your possible
outcomes the context you're in will now
determine the net result
if I'm in a context where there's no
pleasure or a word I'm going to be
depressed
if I'm in a context where I'm seeking
pleasure
I'm going to get addicted if I am
struggling and I need to fight what we
call Warrior genetics which is what I'm
made up of I can get deeper into that I
will strive and I will Thrive and I'll
accomplish great things right because of
my need for more reward whatever I did
yesterday isn't good enough today
that's that's true for depression
addiction ADHD all these things that
we've labeled as problems
and why are they so hard to measure and
treat because they're very different for
different people so if you have the same
pathway like myself the opposite picture
of the flip opposite the maximum binding
of dopamine in a very slow clearance
that person has such an easy time
experience pleasuring a war that they
become call it flaky they're just not
interested they're not motivated because
everything's already good enough walk
out of a meeting with 10 action items
yeah great they don't even start eight
of them because they already feel the
sensor reward just by talking about it
but the two that they really enjoy
because the clearance takes them long
they end up binging
right the thing that gives them that
elevated sense they get stuck in it and
they binge so these are the people that
are like subject matter experts me
I want every opportunity I can't say no
right and I want to do this and I want
to do this and I want to do it amazing
they're like all this sucks no I don't
care about your Netflix TV show but the
one that I like I'm watching six
episodes
right so the same pathway creating two
very different results and we can talk
about all the different Pathways and
it's the same for all of them
it's really interesting but the if I had
to guess and this is absolutely a guess
I have a tremendous ability to feel the
dopamine so I get excited man I am very
easy to excite yeah but I have a feeling
that my dopamine clears fast yeah so I'm
always on to the next yeah and I have
said and I mean this without I'm not
trying to be funny
my need for uh the next thing the next
thing the next thing borders on
pathological yeah and I'll be very
curious to see how that manifests so we
you're probably right and I'll tell you
that part of the work that I've
personally done again I'm not a
clinician so I don't treat patients but
I've interviewed hundreds of people
about their mood and behavior their
brain very purposely because first of
all I love it second because I came in
with a different perspective that wasn't
the genetic Norm right so I I
interviewed I would say over 100
millionaires right and maybe a couple
well I would say about seven to twelve
billionaires right to understand how
they think and it just happened to be
that we're part of part of our research
to understand mood and behavior why did
they do what they did right I also I
also interviewed nurses and firefighters
to understand why are they so reliable
and dependent in these rocks that we can
lean on right to understand their neural
behavior and what I learned is somebody
like yourself who's Mission driven right
but is able to build is exactly what
you're describing very easy to feel but
it doesn't last long enough
which is why you need it and you need it
and you need it but when you do it right
you're in it you have enough pleasure
it's not the pathological thing that
you're hanging on to that little rope is
the ability to maintain it
the what I do is I take a little bit too
much risk so I'm either going to build a
billion dollar company or Crash and Burn
right what's happening day to day isn't
good enough
so and this is what we learned and this
was consistent when I when I interviewed
a hedge fund manager
exactly like you uh except they also had
a very strong ability to say no
right their their job was to not lose
more important than to make right the
average for a hedge fund Banner is 50 50
anyway it's like costing it tossing a
coin right so it's how do I not lose as
opposed to how I make so they're very
risk adverse the guy that hired the
hedge fund manager the billionaire that
owns the company does not think that way
but he knows he needs these people
around him to not lose and not screw up
and we learn that people kind of fall in
place when there's a risk averse guy is
dopamine profile look like so it's it's
it's very similar to what you're
describing where the ability to feel
that is high uh but they don't they
clear it a little quicker so they can
move on and make others and multitask
multi-prioritized the key thing that
they do differently however is that
their ability to deal with the what we
call Brain Drive neurotropic Factor bdnf
so bdnf determines neuroplasticity the
ability to develop neural Pathways they
don't do that well
right so they're not good at wearing
multiple hats they're not good at
looking they're hyper focused in subject
matter experts they do this thing with
tunnel vision
right they also their serotonin pathways
are off and when we talk about serotonin
we usually look at it as depression and
mood
uh but when you look at it more
functionally this is what we learned by
actually sitting in front of people and
interview them by the way we interviewed
7 000 people so it's the largest
clinical in-person genomic study in the
world and this is the gap between here's
genetics 80 chance Alzheimer's versus
how did I not get it we learned that by
actually meeting people so in that we
learned that these people once again
their serotonin pathway is off the
actual receptor was a little short and
they're disregulated for their ability
to deal with mood but serotonin has a
key uh attribute that people don't use
it for which is prioritizing stimulus
what does that mean we're sitting here
we're focused and we're talking some
people can't do that they're noticing
the camera they're noticing the lights
there's a flicker there's a sound
there's a smell there's a whatever right
these people have that problem meaning
that every little detail and Nuance
bothers them so in their behavior they
might seem irritable
they might seem easy to frustrate easy
to distract also but when they're
reviewing things every little T and I
that needs to be crossed and dotted they
see and when they come back to the table
to speak to whoever they come back with
this deep highly analytical report that
nobody else could actually do right and
but it causes other problems they can't
sleep at night
why can't they sleep at night because in
your second half of your sleep cycle
first half good deep sleep typically
these people don't have a problem with
that in the second half at some point
your body is supposed to wake up it
knows that I'm going to be awake at some
point
just like melatonin puts you to sleep
serotonin wakes you up so you make it in
your sleep sunlight comes through the
window pierces through your eyelid and
you're supposed to start binding
serotonin and be awake
so that stimulation because they can't
prioritize stimulus they don't know if
the temperature off or the weird noise
or the you know hubby's pulling on the
blanket all of that sensorial problem
triggers the serotonin binding serotonin
binding serotonin because their body
doesn't know what to focus on and then
they can't sleep in the second half of
their night
right so this functional you know
approach to their specific problem as
opposed to take a pill which once again
may not actually solve their problem
right so we learned all of this stuff by
sitting in front of people interviewing
them and just continues to blow my mind
every day are we slaves to our genetics
so no not at all and this is this is the
misconception that your genes are your
destiny
right they are your destiny if you don't
understand them and you're doing
everything wrong right and for the most
part we aren't designed for our current
reality that is true for most people
what does that mean give me a quick
thumbnail sketch of current reality
current reality is you go to work and
there's chemicals that paint to the wall
there's chemicals that cleaned your
carpet you're working on a desk that was
just cleaned by the cleaning guy you
received mail and you're talking
touching a package with pollution all
over it right are you designed to cope
with all that you're going for a quick
bite at lunch and something that was
wrapped in plastic you're ingesting
microplastics are you designed for that
you didn't sleep enough and you're
stressed for eight hours straight and
producing cortisol is that what your
ancestors did right you're not outside
getting vitamin D which by the way of
the 30 000 some odd genes in your body
10 of that 10 of your genes require
vitamin D to function
yeah so ten percent of your human
biochemistry is dependent on this one
micronutrient
right and you're indoors for 10 hours 12
hours and then you go home and you're
indoors again right so we're not doing
what we're designed for not in our fault
we don't know what we know I can do
whatever I want and when I break myself
the doctor will fix me that's what we
know right we don't ask or don't even
believe that it's possible to not get
there to not be sick in the first place
quick derail on the vitamin D sure
so I I get vitamin D as a matter of
religion yeah
because I read something
how true this is I'm not entirely sure
but it sounds like where you're going
that this will be pretty accurate that
if you get skin cancer
you are more likely to survive skin
cancer if you get a sunburn than you are
if you get no sun let me say that again
if you get skin cancer you're more
likely to survive if you get a sunburn
than if you don't get any more sun
that's insane yeah I was like I'm sorry
what so that's when I was like all right
I gotta get son I believe that vitamin D
has been rebranded vitamin D
it's actually a hormone I believe it's
been rebranded because every everybody
had enough there'd be a much lesser
expenditure in healthcare
right why call it vitamin D because they
want people to supplement you're take
you're taking away its value by what you
named it I see it's a sheep in it it's
truly a hormone got it it's like calling
testosterone vitamin T and putting it on
the shelf right but understanding how
important testosterone is That's What
vitamin D is it's truly a hormone that's
why so much is dependent and it's not
just it's and it's not a direct
correlate a vitamin D prevents or stops
cancer if 10 of your biochemistry is
dependent on this thing and you don't
have it everything's out of whack why do
you feel off in the winter you know why
do women get osteoporosis problems and
some don't
what are all these things that are
dependent on this one again Hub going
back to that central theme of find the
Hub the thing that's broken in your
biochemistry fuel that properly and all
the spokes go away
right yeah man so vitamin D I think is
incredibly important but I have a
conflicted relationship with the sun's
potential effects on aging and wrinkles
and is it just yep sorry the sun you
need it but the sun is going to age your
skin for sure so then understanding how
you do that right we don't all ages the
same way we don't all have the same
negative outcome from too much sun did
your ancestors come from an equatorial
climate no then you probably aren't
meant to be in the sun all day and if we
look at your vitamin D profile I can
predict and we'll look at it when you
need your genome back vitamin D is the
only micronutrient that has a multi-step
metabolism process a vitamin C vitamin A
there's one gene that takes it puts it
in your blood that's it simple because
our ancestors did different things and
had different exposure you know your
ancestry might be a little bit Northern
a little less sunlight more clouds right
yeah and so what they probably did had a
really good ability to Step One draw D2
from the Sun and convert it into D3
that's step one that's one gene then
once it's in the blood you need to
transport it to the cell where it's
actually used that's a second Gene
then once it's at the cell you need to
bind it like you said those guys that
are catching the stuff and connect to
your cell that's another Gene so this
pathway you'll find that there's a high
variability between people who are more
equatorial that don't do this process so
efficiently right and then people that
means they need more they need more
or they need multiple they may need
multiple doses that's where they may get
it wrong you mean multiple doses meaning
that okay I do a good job of bringing it
into the system but I don't transfer to
the cell and I don't bind it that means
if I take my couple thousand IU in the
morning I've only used 500 of it aren't
you super suspect though of
supplementing the sun like I don't I'm
ignorant nobody should listen to me but
here's my big concern that there's way
more going on when Sun hits your skin
than we think and if you're just trying
to supplement the isolated D3
you there's almost certainly things
you're not doing for instance correct me
if I'm wrong but I think the sun
penetrates far enough to get into the
bone that's crazy yeah it that sun
exposure again what did your ancestors
do they got out they started working in
the morning right they're outside
working so taking a vitamin b supplement
is a acute Band-Aid response to living
in New York inside in the winter
your walking Outdoors is not going to
help you right because you're not
producing vitamin D you're not getting
enough sun it's like too low or
something it's it's just not enough
right in the winter there just isn't
enough in certain areas so you have to
supplement that's what supplement means
add more right so but if you are in
Phoenix or here in La you know you're
good you probably don't need as much if
you go outside that's if you go outside
I just live in L.A I lived in L.A for a
long time but I was afraid of the Sun so
I never went out I'm sure I was wildly
yeah and there's so much that's
triggered I suppose I should finish that
yeah
and it's not just um so it's also your
sleep right your eyes seeing sunlight in
the morning triggers the start of your
clock
how many people can't sleep at night
because they don't start their day
properly
the Circadian rhythm there's genes that
direct that there's literally a gene
called clock
that Regulators are being called clock
yeah and it literally regulates your
clock your internal clock cleverly name
yeah so if you have the bad version of
it and you're not starting your day the
right way your body can't cope with
whatever you're doing right you're on
Netflix till midnight blue light we talk
about there's some people that say well
my laptop doesn't bother me I can be on
my phone until I knock out and I have no
problem some people need to shut it off
two hours before so starting your day
the way your ancestor started which is
out in the sun your eyes getting that
dose of sun like actual sunlight will
turn your circadian rhythm clock on so
that your body knows what time to sleep
right just simple things like that yeah
going back to your idea of ancestral
stuff and not thinking about your
grandparents because we're already now
that's what a hundred years ago versus
the 200 000 I've heard you say 200 000
and 250 000. that we've basically been
modern humans yeah that's the range
right uh and different people will say
different things but something happened
around that time where we became who we
are so our brain changed right we done
we developed emotion we developed
complicated speaking skills uh our
bodies changed and we basically whatever
you believe about where we came from uh
whether it's the religious belief or the
scientific belief we became who we are
yeah right humans don't existed uh we
did not change and we still haven't
changed so if you look at the Genome of
that 200 to 250 000 year old person it's
exactly the same as it is today if you
are a Ferrari right here and you've
designed to be a Ferrari and you race a
track for 200 000 years and all of a
sudden every Ferrari is going off-road
they're all going to break all of them
because they were not designed for that
and that's what we're doing to ourselves
we're all that fish in the Fishbowl
we're industrialization you know
processing uh and it's it's so much more
worse for women you wonder why there's
the prevalence of why is it that you
know 80 of the Alzheimer's cases are in
women eighty percent of the research
dollars are spent on men it's more than
that actually but the cases are in women
because they also have to deal with a
cofactor of estrogen toxicity which we
don't as much some of us do but most of
us don't which is another internal
source of inflammation
and these same chemicals that I'm
talking about that cause inflammation
also mimic hormones as they enter your
body so imagine you're a woman that in
your hormone Cascade
we can determine progesterone converts a
testosterone converts to estrogen and
there's nuances in how you do that men
and women do the same thing men do it
every day women do it once a month same
cycle right so some women progesterone
to testosterone to estrogen filling that
estrogen bucket really really heavy
right
what do you then do with that estrogen
you convert it into a metabolite before
you get rid of it it could be toxic two
hydroxys are called great that's what
you want 4 and 16 hydroxy highly highly
toxic and a lot of women do that even
then it doesn't mean you're sick now add
to that that you're again pesticides in
the grass cleaning chemicals something
as simple as a printed grocery receipt
you know the laser printed ones Teflon
coated frying pan oh stop you got to
tell me more yeah so I eat off a Teflon
all day every day so disrupter okay yeah
crazy hormone disruptor what how do I
scramble my eggs so for you it's not
again personalization for you it's not
that big of a deal because you're having
I hope yeah your energy inside I'm only
27 years old I'm kidding but like uh for
real so let's assume that I shouldn't be
eating Teflon yeah what how do I how to
use scramble yourself what did your
ancestor do cast iron cast iron cast
iron that's what you actually stick yeah
to that pan you gotta do the work hard
you gotta do the work brand you got to
put butter on there make sure it doesn't
stick interesting cast iron huh not
ceramic
uh ceramic I haven't personally found a
problem right I would think I don't
think there is a lot of hormone
disruptor as far as you know no no no
but Teflon yes right chemicals in
general kept most chemicals in general
hormone disruptors what we call
endocrine disruption plastic water
bottles horrible really horrible yeah
yeah taking everything away yeah
especially in a city like La where
you're it's sitting in the Heat and the
plastic is seeping into the water even
more exponentially right so if I keep
them cold or no even then it's bad even
then but the heat makes it much worse
right so all we're saying is that women
are worse off and you ask all these
questions 66 percent of women will die
on their first cardiovascular event with
zero symptoms or warning signs they
don't even know they have a
cardiovascular disease why because of
the cofactor of estrogen toxicity
they're hit with this cholesterol
Problem whatever other problem but
they're also dealing with this other
inflammatory live longer how is estrogen
toxic or is there a natural way like hey
in the 250 000 year time Horizon SD it
was fine but in a modern scenario
because of XYZ it's problematic so the
women that were saying live longer are
not of this generation
right
ouch you're thinking about Grandma ouch
right you're thinking about Grandma pre
everything is laced in chemicals
that's a different reality right women
of today why is it that it's either
crazy menopause infertility uh you know
what the [__] why I'm not I'm not
selling my wife how she's talked about
this publicly but she like hasn't had a
period in a long time now she's way too
lean yep so I'll just tell you that's
part of the problem yeah uh but what the
[__] that's what's happening the hormone
85 percent of North America American
women how many 85 of North American
women will take a birth control pill for
five to fifteen years yeah yeah right
that's just fueling that estrogen fire
and then once you're off the birth
control pill and you get close to
menopause you go on hormone therapy
estrogen fire okay so women are taking
way too much estrogen it's combined with
environmental toxins which we will
include food fill the bucket even more
now we've got a problem it's getting
stored in their fatty tissue which means
hips and breasts is this the theory on
why women get breast cancer one of the
reasons this is a functional reason so
there's there's actual genetic
conditions meaning there's a gene that's
turned on or off which equals a problem
okay so we're back to broca yeah so
bracha so the belief is if you ask a
woman about braca even if you ask a
doctor about Breco they will tell you
breast cancer risk
bracket does not cause breast cancer it
actually protects you from it but if you
have that bad version okay I was gonna
say why does that have such a bad rape
yeah so that the reason is because some
people don't have the good version of it
right that somebody has the bad version
of braco bracha is a tumor suppressing
Gene so if you have breast cancer it's
supposed to fix it got it if your repair
tool is broken because your genetic code
is broken got it you don't fix it so
it's a Brack of variant
so what that means is not risk of cancer
inability to recover inability to fight
it right but so many more women are
getting breast cancer
right why it wasn't that common you know
you know how they used to cure breast
cancer in England eat blueberries until
you turn blue I'm talking about like
great grandmother's generation and it
worked why because of the gene
expression modulators that are in the
blueberry will you actually turn blue
well that's a bit of an exaggeration I
was going to say because I know with
carrots like you will start to get skin
colored uh yeah if you're eating that
much of it it's gonna change but anyway
that was a solution and it worked
because the the hormone dominance
hormone estrogen to talk to the fuel of
the fire wasn't to the degree that it is
today so let's get back to that so now
bracha yeah the good or bad version you
either do a good job of fighting cancer
and you don't but why did you get cancer
to begin with that same woman that we
just described that has a heavy load of
estrogen toxicity which is a lot of
women
who then step two of three converts it
into a toxic metabolite one of three
options two of the options are toxic one
isn't most women are in these toxic
buckets that we've seen right step three
of three is you now need to get rid of
it so you produce this toxin your
oxidative Pathways the same thing we
talked about the the marathon runner
that causes the cardiovascular problems
right uh the same then the glutathione
pathway the guy that was golfing that
you know clears the talk the same
Pathways also clear this stuff right so
now also if you don't do that job well I
message and dominant estrogen toxic and
I don't get rid of it I now have a toxic
environment but why did women of last
two three four generations not have the
propensity of breast cancers they do
today because now you're also dealing
with the hormone disruptors the 10 years
of breast birth birth control pill the
five years of bhrt hormone replacement
therapy trying to look young and
beautiful the Teflon coated frying pan
right the pesticides in my grass the
Plastics and all these other things that
are in my food that are on my table that
are in my makeup the phthalates and all
this stuff and everything that is going
in through your lungs stomach and skin
and entering your bloodstream that's the
woman who has fueled the fire to such a
degree that like you said the body is
wondering what do I do with all this
stuff
when you're menopausal you don't have a
cycle anymore
that that cleanse that monthly cleanse
why do women get rid of this material
every month the miracle of a human body
when you say get rid of this material
they shed the uterine lining is that
what we're talking about estrogen
toxicity is that that byproduct of
estrogen is is 4 and 16 hydroxy
estrogens what they're called that's
that toxic metabolite you're getting rid
of it every month right if you don't
have a menstrual cycle anymore because
you're menopausal you're not getting rid
of it and your body's trying to protect
your organs and your vasculature from
this inflammatory insult so like you
said what is up my friend Tom bilyu here
and I have a big question to ask you how
would you rate your level of personal
discipline on a scale of one to ten if
your answer is anything less than a ten
I've got something cool for you and let
me tell you right now discipline by its
very nature means compelling yourself to
do difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact I will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right I've just released a class from
Impact Theory university called how to
build Ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things the
greatness is going to require review
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work I will see you inside
this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until then my friends be
legendary peace out
it goes and stores it in fact
and women have fat in their breasts and
they have all these glands meant to
deliver milk that were not designed
structurally to deal with that level of
toxin
and they get inflamed and the cells
become damaged and then you get cancer
that's one answer there's many ways you
get there but that's one right if you
know if I test a five-year-old girl and
I tell you this
you can absolutely then prevent the
cancer because she knows what choices to
make
right if you or if you take the pill
stay out of the toxic soup
make sure you keep your period
what else it's it's a it's a it's a
couple of things you can do it's one
here's the biological function I don't
do well so I need to take the right
supplements or eat the right food to
support that genetic expression right if
we've mapped all that out that's that's
it's easy to prescribe now it was a gray
area before but it's easy though second
thing is don't do the things that you're
not meant to do so what are the if the
prescription is easy
eat a lot of blueberries apparently what
else
so by the way eat a cup of blueberries a
day and your biological age will drop
about a decade in a Year ah then I'm an
infant yeah I eat the most blueberries
yeah the antioxidant if you're eating
proper blueberries right like smaller
organic clean small mine are often very
large so food that's that's one Telltale
sign by the way food is should be small
whatever yeah bitter I'm sure yeah and
yeah it doesn't taste and the texture is
up and right everything is so everything
has been enlarged for and what ends up
happening a potato which used to look
like smaller than a golf ball which now
looks like this is sugar right it used
to be nutrient dense you used to be able
to get your protein fill from a potato
but you can't find those potatoes
anymore really yeah I knew we'd been
changing fruit for sure I didn't know we
had that kind of manipulation on
potatoes yeah just just uh last week
they passed the law in Mexico to get rid
of all the GMO corn and bring back all
the because they realize how sick a bit
interesting man this is going to get
interesting because here here is the
reality the GMO has allowed us to feed a
lot more people
and I know there are some cynical people
out there that are more than happy to
say no have less kids not realizing what
pandemonium that will introduce to the
world population collapse you want to
see what that does to the economy yeah
oh God yeah and I know like dude it is
super cynical when people are like okay
it'll be rough for a minute no it's
hundreds of millions of people dying
either from starvation or uh War caused
by famine it's it's not a good look so
for the majority of us that answer of
there now isn't enough food if it isn't
geomo and mass it's because of the food
that we eat is so lacking nutrients that
we're eating more if you actually had
nutrient dense food right if you had the
food the way it used to be you don't
need to eat that much it delivers you
exactly the micronutrients and all the
macronutrients that you need in this in
a handful if you look at a proper egg
with a deep orange yolk right like a
proper egg from a bird that was pasture
grazed it's very different in the the
value that you get from that versus
three GMO pale yellow yolk eggs it's not
the same thing
right so a chicken in the 1950s used to
be one kilo
in the 70s and I'm Canadian so I'm using
kilos in the 70s there were like two and
now they're four that's a proper normal
chicken they have quadrupled in size
imagine if what is the average human
like 170 180 pounds what if the average
was now 800 pounds
we're getting close yeah I mean this is
so you said something earlier that made
me think about so the genome doesn't
change rapidly Evolution happens slowly
and from a religious perspective I'm
perfectly happy to say God gave us
Evolution whatever but evolution is
happening
I can't remember if I heard this from
you or somebody else but there are
elephants now being born without tusks
because they're not being poached right
elephants without tusks stay alive
longer have more children which is now
why because of poachers that we're
starting to see more and more being born
without tests absolutely fascinating and
it begs the question will we get people
that are good at dealing with
environmental toxins and obesity like
are we gonna get good at being fat like
it's so that's funny because the the
gstm-1 gene which is protective of the
gut
when we look at our data objective in
what way uh kind of like your first line
of defense to bind and prevent toxins
from causing problems entering the
bloodstream and also protecting people
with a better epithelial lining uh no
the the inner gut wall so it the toxins
that come along with your food are
extracted and removed got it right which
then allows the lining to be healthier
which prevents leaky gut and gut
dysbiosis you'll have a healthier gut
right so that Gene we found in our
research that 49 of people don't even
have it
right 46 of people have 50 of the
instruction so they're minus 50 capacity
only a tiny fraction less than 10
percent actually have both copies from
Mom and Dad so that's an example of
something that we didn't need
right we didn't need because food wasn't
a threat now that it is what's happening
is we're getting both copies but we the
body isn't designed to be that
hyperactive in terms of gut detox so
it's now causing autoimmune conditions
for the people that have both copies
that are doing an excellent job like you
said evolving into our current reality
now have autoimmune conditions because
they're overdoing the detox like so that
threat that comes into their stomach
it's not you're not fighting yourself
just like we talk about the cytokine
storm with covid right it's so powerful
that you trigger an autoimmune response
and you end up fighting yourself so the
people that are now evolving into that
there's some blessing in how we were
designed and how perfect we are and how
perfect food used to be versus what now
we're involving into to cope with now
what food is what the environment is and
that's imbalanced the thing that we need
to be able to cope is making us sick
you brought covet up again yeah he said
God forbid you get something like covet
I'm trying to think of covet now as like
it's a cold yeah
but God forbid so uh is this tack on
Attack on the tissues like what is the
big concern literally my wife just had
covens yeah so we are dealing with here
March 20 20
by May 2020 we had started getting out
to the world about why there was Zero
symptoms
symptomatic and in the hospital
and it wasn't covered that was doing
those things covet is the Catalyst or
the trigger that is at that time not
anymore right the the virus has changed
a lot but at that time was caused the
level of inflammation that if you were
in respiratory poor health metabolic
poor health or cardiovascular poor
health pushed you over the edge just
right it was kind of like we can
understand your metabolic Health by the
way
only five percent of Americans are
metabolically healthy what yes that's
data that the CDC is agreeing to that
was published about a month ago
that is so it's disgusting terrifying
five percent people are actually walking
around with the ability to actually be
healthy wow do you know how they how do
they judge that what is it the uh
they're taking flexibility uh insulin
they're taking data on yeah insulin
response and they're taking so they're
they're taking all this so what we do
have now which we didn't have before is
all this aggregated data from all these
emrs and systems that are being put
together and so they know they have mass
population data and the CDC itself is
saying which you wouldn't expect them to
say only fiber so it's probably two
percent if they're saying five yeah so
going back to this if you were
metabolically unhealthy if you were why
did so many more Americans die of covid
than other nations
right it's not just got sick but died
because cardiovascular health was poor
respiratory Health was poor and
metabolic Health was poor you were
already positioned for when the threat
came you were already at the Tipping
Point something had to push you over the
edge and this Catalyst was powerful in
the beginning
so what we understood is we we then at
that time
put on a program to our on our own
customer base where we we looked at the
people who had poor cardiovascular
genetics and poor respiratory genetics
and poor metabolic genetics genetics and
we custom built cocktails for them we
have a compounding pharmacy where we
actually make formulas that are custom
and we learn and we've you know we then
teach other people and we put 200 pieces
you were in a supplement guy
in in our company I'm not the guy one of
our co-founders you have a supplementary
I'm not the guy yeah yeah so uh but it's
a big part of what we do understanding
what genes augment genetic expression
I'm sorry what ingredients so we did
that 200 people is that really a thing
yeah like I'm so
I consider myself ignorant to
supplements and I'm very paranoid about
isolating things and then in taking them
because it always seems like a good idea
and I'm definitely if a little is good a
lot must be better kind of guy yeah but
I know that that's a risky thing to do
with your body what are give me some Top
Line supplements that are like oh yeah
yeah those are so Precision is important
just like you said what we learned is
the same ingredient that could be
beneficial can be problematic in a
different dose so the same dim and
curcumin that I mentioned earlier for
women that they commonly take this one
woman will have an amazing outcome
another one will get migraines because
her genetic ability to use it is
different so you guys are doing the
supplementation obviously based on the
generation yeah so we we build and we're
not supplementing the problem that's
broken in supplements you don't say I
feel like this so I need to supplement
go back to the hub
right what what central Hub is failing
and solve that problem we know there are
problems like rickets that are a
deficiency problem what percentage do
you think is you're encountering
something that you need to cut out and
what percentages you're missing
something that you need so vitamin D
would be you're missing something that
you need uh and then most of the other
things I can think of are all you're
encountering something that you
shouldn't but if you had and I know this
is a total swag but just so I get your
breakdown that exact example
part of our science team there was a
gentleman from the Caribbean moved to
Toronto he got school vitamin D problems
I'll just tell you right now yeah
scoliosis one leg was about an inch and
a half shorter than the other one oh and
he walked with a limp which did not
happen to him earlier because a lot you
know up until that whatever age he had
the dose he needed and the lifestyle he
needed to absorb it because he was
outside and all of a sudden he moved to
Toronto where there was Winter and there
was no and he got scoliosis so we didn't
treat the scoliosis we said you need to
go outside in the morning and you need
to take this dose of vitamin D and you
need to spread it because you don't
transport it bind enough it went away
scoliosis yeah
it actually went away
he had he had been doing a bunch of
treatment he went so this is where I'm
saying that if you try and mask the
symptom you haven't got rid of the the
fuel of that fire that's causing the
symptom chronic disease if you think
about sushi in the bowl right chronic
disease doesn't start the day she
entered the bowl
you need that exposure for some time and
then the inflammation or the cellular
degradation or the oxidation or
detoxification one of these things is
failing which presents it takes you to a
level where all sudden it expresses
where you're sick some it depends where
you're failing and then what disease you
get in his case it was scoliosis we have
an NHL hockey player we deal with a lot
of NHL players because we're in Toronto
Mecca hockey training right so there was
a young gentleman
who was meant to be a star player and in
his rookie season failed and kept
getting fractures
right and he also couldn't recover from
training like his peers and he also
couldn't recover from the partying when
they would go drinking and doing
whatever they did he would need to rest
and that was affecting his mood and it
was also affecting his game so what did
we find this guy was half Mexican
so his ancestry 50 of his ancestry spent
time in the sun he also grew up in the
southern I think in Arizona right so now
all of a sudden you have a guy that you
pick out of Arizona drop him into
Toronto training indoors on an ice rink
that's what he does
and you wonder why all of a sudden he
started getting fractures
because he has a genetic Pathway to to
not use the vitamin D he's getting
because his ancestors are Overexposed
they were Outdoors all the time they
were sung all the time
so when you have that much vitamin D is
toxic it's one of the few micro it's
actually probably the only micronutrient
which you have too much is actually
harmful and your body will store in fat
and try and protect you so to mitigate
that the gene Pathway to transport it
was slowed down the gene Pathway to
binding will slow it down now you take
him out of that context and drop him
into a different context which he's not
aligned for and he starts getting
fractures so he's already got a lot less
sun coming in and he's had an adaptation
historically to make sure that he slows
the processing of that to make sure that
it doesn't take in too much so you've
got a quadruple whammy by the time
you're up in Toronto wow and now it
starts affecting his mood which affected
his game because vitamin D you know your
neural pathways are also driven by it
right so you're if you don't have enough
you wonder why so many people in the
winter just feel off I have the winter
Blues right the suicide levels at
Christmas time yes there's some social
Factor there but it's also this that's
when you have the least vitamin D in
your system yeah right
yeah yeah man like this is crazy so
I'm gonna take my swag at what I think
is deficiency versus what I think is uh
you're encountering something that you
shouldn't I'm gonna go with a nice 80 20
rule 80 you're encountering things you
shouldn't your diet environmental toxins
danger danger Will Robinson and then 20
is
you probably should be getting
micronutrients from vegetables the
vegetables at least in my sort of
semi-educated way like you have to be a
little bit thoughtful about what you're
taking in because the plants have their
own defense mechanisms yes uh and then
I've just seen it just absolutely slap
my wife around like if if she's having a
flare-up uh digestive flare-up then it
Retreat to meat if she Retreats back to
beef or lamb she's good it's never like
oh go heavy on the spinach and then it's
like we're gonna exacerbate the problem
yeah so I'm super suspect to that but
also I don't know just long term it
feels like you probably need some
micronutrients from that even if it's
just getting some dirt from the soil
um but yeah what do you think 80 20 it
is so the funny thing is just this
morning I was on this call with this
telemedicine company who wants to
incorporate a sleep program into what
they do and our deck literally says 80
20. really yeah it's right in there
right and so to take your wife as an
example
um
there's a gene called Fatu that
determines [__] two enough [__] f-u-t
Fu there we go I was like I heard it
again yeah but there is a gene called
MTHFR which everyone refers to as mother
something yeah right but uh and that's a
methylation gene so anyways what two uh
most people that we have seen cannot be
vegans wow yeah the enzymes required to
rely on uh you know all the proteins
that are like you know lentils beans
legumes chickpeas all that stuff so much
sense right yeah the enzymes required
are developed by one gene which most
people have the bad version dude I see
I'm I'm really interested in getting
tested now because I look at somebody
like Rich Roll and I'm like I promise
you that man is a beautiful human being
he's not lying yeah so he really feels
awesome it's really served him well but
every time I try it I'm like I don't
feel good me too I had the same and
there's more people in that bucket than
the good bucket but the people for whom
it's good it is incredible right it
makes them feel amazing you said your
wife likes uh lamb right
again the [__] too by the way is part of
the methylation pathway your
anti-inflammatory response there's
another Gene in the methylation pathway
which determines what version of B12 you
need so the B12 that you get from beef
is metabolizing your gut and if your
ancestors ate a lot of beef you probably
are designed to do that most of our
ancestors didn't most of them ate lamb
and sheep easier to herd you know
there's a lot of convenience around it
if you think about back way back when
right and so you have a different
version of the gene where you actually
metabolize B12 right in your mouth on
your tongue this is why grandma says
chew your food she's right you know you
there's some micronutrients that you
actually sublingually under your tongue
directly absorb into your bloodstream
right and so even when you take a B12
supplement you have to take the version
that your body actually metabolizes
right and now when your wife will eat
lamb or sheep for a week or even goat
she's going to feel amazing her brain is
going to be a little sharper all these
like pains and aches might go away
inflammation load goes down she might
sleep a little bit less it's a better
deeper quality sleep because as one
micronutrient is triggering all these
anti-inflammatory responses yeah right
take that away all sudden she doesn't
feel good somebody else may not have the
problem they eat beef every day and they
feel amazing
he has so much debate about diet like
religious zealotry anger and getting to
the genetic component of like the the
person that's really fighting for their
way it's like yeah it probably works for
you but the idea of one size fits all
just doesn't add up that is the keyword
diet is removing one-size-fits all trial
and error you're hearing you're
inundated with I listened to this
podcast I watch this YouTube video it
worked for that person look how amazing
they look I don't disagree it probably
did work for that person but are you
that person yeah right the same uh by
the way
Brown game right
insulin response is known as something
that's caused by sugar
because all the research is done on you
Western European white Mill
Brown guy I also get an insulin response
from saturated fat it's not in the
literature anywhere
because my genetics are not like yours
and you wonder why so many South Asian
people suffer from diabetes and
cardiovascular disease no matter what
they're doing even if they go on a
carnivore diet because they're eating
the thing that triggers insulin response
which it doesn't do for Western European
white male right that genetic Nuance
that one thing could be the reason why
they got sick or lived an extra 10 years
right
yeah
yeah and it's endless man you can dive
into anything you can dive in this stuff
is so complex yeah that's the the catch
is I'm grateful because we're obviously
moving in the right direction people are
beginning to learn and understand like
what's the role of genetics what's the
role of environment what are things that
are environmental toxins how much is the
food supply changed oh you can't just
break glyphosate on everything like you
know antibiotics like I remember when my
wife first went through the big dramatic
like problem with her gut was
probably about a year before that I
didn't even know what a microbiome was
right and so thinking about how new the
microbiome is to science most people
most doctors 20 years ago didn't even
know what a microbiome was so as we get
more of this information we begin to
realize what we can do about it now one
thing I want to ask as somebody who's
focused on DNA what's the idea behind
junk DNA is it junk does that purpose
so what we believe is that genetics is
an interpreting DNA properly so all that
stuff you hear right Define junk DNA for
people that don't know there's 30 000
genes right we used to believe by the
way up until a month ago that there was
22 000. the human genome was just fully
sequenced a month ago I was going to say
I always thought the number was like 20
something yeah so it just got kicked up
to 30. we now know more about arguino
and when people say that there there are
30 000 genes that do something that do
something because there's a whole lot
more yeah that appear to do nothing yeah
then all of a sudden you have stuff that
is deleterious or there's stuff that is
actually detrimental it causes you
problem so if you ask different people
about what junk DNA means you'll get
different responses right there's a
scientific response of actual junk in
your DNA right then there's there's
people that are more functional in their
thinking that will tell you it's the
stuff that actually causes you harm that
maybe one day Gene editing will and I
can tell you something that's going to
blow your mind in terms of what's
Happening uh at the government level
uh for genetic intervention might as
well just tell you now while we're on
the topic there was a Bill signed that
said that we're going to develop a new
bioeconomic industry right biochemistry
industry no so bioeconomic is I think of
what they called it
which says that now that we know
everything about the genome we are going
to treat it as software
meaning that if we can
alter the genome we can treat it as a
software update and this is this is
based this is in writing by the US
government this was passed uh two two
weeks ago a week ago that um are we
talking like crispr cast 9 go in edit
the genome this is like imagine you have
your Microsoft software and if you don't
update it you can't use it anymore
you need the update to be aligned with
what's happening today
so this is beyond crispr
this is beyond I'm telling you this was
I'll send you the article later this was
in writing past Bill signed very quietly
okay I'm going to read you two
paragraphs
September 12th President Biden signed
the executive order on advancing
biotechnology and biomanufacturing
Innovation for sustainable safe and
secure American bioeconomy the
bioeconomics I was talking about a new
industry that's being developed around
human biology this is what's actually in
writing to be able to write circuitry
for cells in predictively programmed
biology in the same way in which we
write software and program computers
this is part of the bill
right so to be able to write circuitry
for cells and particularly program
biology which means we're now telling
the GOP are they uh allowing that in
humans yes this is I mean
with the right amount of Regulation like
I love crispr but when I heard that in
China the guy was editing the genome to
supposedly make the girls more resistant
to HIV but oh sorry does it also make
them more intelligent my bad like that
was where I was like oh God this turns
into an arms race it gets really scary
and the so now we have to do this is
really interesting we need to research
it more I don't want to overreact I want
to make sure that I go look at this but
um just as a a broad thing
so you have editing somebody's genome in
a way that only affects them and if they
had sex and procreated that it would not
pass the change kind of like cosmetic
surgery but then you have germline
editing yeah where if you procreate then
it passes on to your kids and now it's a
forever thing now it can sweep through
the population and exist forever and
ever now this is where this gets really
interesting so given that I don't know
enough about this I'm super intrigued
that you brought it up but people have
already done things like uh make plants
that glow in the dark if I'm not
mistaken they've made cats that glow in
the dark I didn't even know that I could
be wrong about that the plants I know
100 and I'm pretty sure about the cat
fur thing yeah uh because you can splice
from bioluminescent
um
algae or bioluminescent
Plankton jellyfish whatever anything
that has bioluminescence you can take
that snippet of the genome and insert it
using crispr cast 9 for those that don't
know it literally goes in this is how
and you're going to stop me if I say
anything it's incorrect but this is how
viruses work yeah they go in and they're
like clip a word and they just insert
something new in that Strand and so the
little things that run along the DNA and
execute the code are like cool make a
new piece of virus yeah and so it just
replicates replicates so it overtakes
the Machinery of your own cells and gets
them to create the thing so it's like
you have a bunch gazillions of 3D
printers inside and what a virus does is
hijack that and tell it to print this
other thing right and so you can go in
using the crispr cas9 technology send it
in it will cut make a cut where you want
it which is crazy remove that and either
re-stitch it together without that thing
or insert a new piece of code and so you
can insert bioluminescence you can
insert basically anything that you want
so there was something that oh God now
I'm not sure if I'm talking things that
they are hypothesizing that they should
try or that they actually did but that
you can take I I think this is real I
think they actually did this they took
goats and they edited their genes so
that in the goat's milk they made spider
uh webbing and because it was thicker
that it because spider's web has the
tensile strength stronger than steel
yeah and so you could basically get this
incredibly strong fiber in goat's milk
right and I was like what is happening
so this gets weird so fast that uh
yeah technology inherently isn't good or
bad right advancements makes it so I
think exactly right so now the all the
things we talked about imagine that
golfer that has the bad endothelium
Health right bad quality Hardware if you
can then go isolate and splice that
and all of a sudden given the resiliency
that the other people have that have the
good quality Hardware yep you can
eliminate cholesterolemia okay but dude
are you freaked out by this I don't know
if I'm excited or terrified or a bit of
both I so I am excited with the
opportunity if it's if the intentions
are correct here's what freaks me out
every time assume their intentions are
great yeah now of course I'm setting
aside like the incentives to create
super soldiers and all that for now
let's assume that their intentions are
amazing
we are bad at second and third order
consequences right so when I was back at
Quest I remember that the government was
like that's bad for you now things have
started to change and so when people are
watching this it will seemed crazy that
that was only 10 years ago but 10 years
ago the government was like really going
hard to pass legislation that was like
that's bad it needs to be like signaled
on packaging and if you have so much
saturated fat like it needs to be marked
as like bad and I was like what I'm like
that's absolutely not true and
when you look at the food pyramid and
you look at the my plate recommendation
they are terrible and people should not
be following them so even assuming that
all of their recommendations were with a
golden heart and they were really trying
to help people they still were making
horrendous choices that have caused a
decline in health that is absolutely
terrifying to behold so I am
I haven't thought through my position
entirely but my immediate reaction is to
be deeply unnerved yeah
um
yeah it's interesting the the area where
it's working in theory that avoids all
of that mess is isolated uh not head to
toe genome editing but for example you
may have a rare liver condition yeah
right now that's dope like fixing things
that aren't germline right yes please if
somebody wants to Glow I've got no beef
with that what I have a problem with is
when you when you edit the germline yeah
you've truly done
freaked out yeah because that's
permanent right and you don't want this
permanent in the gene pool yeah yep yeah
and if you can see that like what we
said earlier we have 250 000 years of
evolution and we haven't changed right
so the pace at which we're meant to
change so we don't know what the
negative outcome of tweaking the human
body to that degree that rapidly you
know the exponential we don't know what
the outcome of that is going to be did
you edit your genome
what I would do non-german yeah
non-german that's exactly what I would
do I would
I would deal with what I know is missing
and insert it into places where I'm
biologically better meaning that
I want to be able to cope I want to be
able to golf right I want to be able to
eat foods not that you now feel
invincible and go do everything wrong
but even if you're doing everything
right
there's still a bit of a threat in our
reality right that's how you prevent
chronic disease so there's two layers
there's
get rid of the bed get rid of the
threats and then like we said
supplements are taking the things that
support you with what you don't do
that's the bucket we're talking about
part of supporting what you don't do is
if I can edit the biological or that
Gene snip that is failing that will
cause me to now detoxify better
I'm not going to go start breathing
pollution but I know I can do a better
job with my reality now right and that's
me myself not being passed on do you
know what a double muscled cow is no
there's a gene that controls how much
muscle mass you put on so you clearly
work out and working out for me sucks
and it takes a very long time and since
I know there's a gene that's like ah
muscles expensive don't put on too much
muscle uh
you can adjust it and they there
somebody was hypothesizing that
basically the vast majority of
professional bodybuilders like at the
Olympia Mr Olympia level have one of two
things either just an unbelievable set
of receptors for
um steroids or they have this Gene where
you don't tell the muscles to stop
growing so they work out little I mean
they work out hard obviously but the
results that they get from that amount
is disproportionate yeah now that I've
heard it I read that article I didn't
realize what it was called but that is
again so there's a different answer that
is genetics that's where most of the
funding most of the researchers what is
the outcome that funding a research
wants is a pill
right I want to own and patent something
that if I give it to you it creates like
you need this pill right
and the the functional answers lifestyle
environment nutrition which is you
changing your habits which is not going
and snip my jeans that's what I'm
talking about so yes everything off why
is it challenging for you to put on
muscle the answer is simple we earlier
said that your Androgen dominant right
you have enough free-flowing
testosterone you bind it well which
speaks to your body type your jawline it
speaks to all that your phenotype right
what you're not doing is producing
enough estrogen
estrogen is what gives you Mass the dead
lifter that's not producing enough
estrogen I almost didn't hear that
because that sounds so there's a gene so
progesterone that's where you start
converts into testosterone you may
convert that into DHT which is like the
manly man ripped no fat you know but
it's also highly dry look though even
even when I was my leanest yeah I still
have what they call a wet look right
yeah isn't that from estrogen no so yes
but what you don't have is DHT so GST is
DHT sorry is what gives you the rip
striated where you can see every fiber
yeah right you have that you have that
clean Androgen which for again for
health and vitality and Longevity is the
best you could ask for you probably
don't clear it out there's another Gene
at the top of the funnel that gets rid
of it you probably pulled it in this
pool the gene that converts it into
estrogen you probably have the ultra
slow version right if we alter that
which again comes down to dim and
curcumin in different supplements which
are easy to deal with all those sudden
you can start to feel that estrogen
bucket a little bit more so the
functional answer versus the genetic the
genetic answer is turn the switch on the
functional answer is we can deal with
how you're doing how you metabolize your
hormones today give me let's say it
another way the functional answer is
there are things I can eat that will
increase the expression of that Gene yes
that's so crazy to me and then all of a
sudden you're going to get better at it
and we do this we do this with athletes
all the time we where we do we actually
do the reverse where we work with a lot
of female Olympic athletes and a lot of
them have this problem where I train
just as hard as her but I can't get
ripped right I actually train harder
than her but I don't I can't have the
performance because she is Androgen
dominant in your estrogen dominant so
you have the strength but you don't have
that again lean you know it's harder for
you to burn the fat your endurance may
be not as much but you're stronger
you're bigger right so you're in the
wrong Sport and this is where even with
my own kids by the way I've genetically
tested all of them and I have their
Futures mapped they can choose what to
do what they want with it but I know who
should be playing soccer who should be
playing football oh my God are you going
to tell them they already know whoa they
already know okay now I'm fascinated so
I've seen your Ted Talk on that genomics
is going to change parenting right but
you didn't mention this I'm conflicted
yeah so you know that you're gonna sway
them right those little like subtle so
have you heard this study is crazy so
they pull teachers aside and they said
look Timmy Sally and Bobby are gifted
don't treat him any differently but we
just want to watch and see what happens
to gifted kids in the class and she's
like cool I won't treat them any
differently no problem Timmy Bobby and
Sally will inevitably rise to the top of
the class now the problem is they picked
Timmy Bobby and Sally at random right
and then just by telling the teacher
they're gifted and telling the teacher
don't treat them any differently teacher
can't help it yeah they start seeing in
them the giftedness they start giving
them a little more time a little more
attention and that makes them better
sure aren't you worried that by telling
them their future that it will make
their future come true again context
what am I telling them by the way
there's also a message to play soccer
well yes but there's one soccer this one
hockey like what's the breakdown they so
it's what what do I what am I looking at
um body type that's step one and when
we're talking about Athletics what are
they gonna look I already know what
they're going to look like as adults
that is insane but I'm with you yeah
totally because the hormones drive that
right hormones drive fat muscle bone all
that stuff like what are you gonna look
like
I also know how they think right I know
what version of what chemical the same
thing we talked about production binding
clearance right I know how they do those
things so I know how to speak to them
the way they're disciplined is different
they're uniquely disciplined because I
know the middle one the middle one has
the worst possible serotonin pathway
right so he is a drama queen
everything bothers them everything
frustrates him so I have to give it to
him piecemeal I can't say you have this
much homework it's burnout
can't even start right I have to do one
thing take a break do one thing the
other one needs high level of structure
the older one if he doesn't have
structure he's going to fail every time
but if he has a structure he will get it
done within the timeline and the so the
way they think is unique right uh going
back to what he said earlier by the way
there's a placebo Gene so there's
literally a placebo Gene wow yeah for
that manifesting your thoughts there's
actually a gene that determines how well
you do that
I have the biggest Placebo genius
whatever the like most effective thought
control is that's yeah I got that so
your ability to actually believe the
sugar pill is real is actually
manifested through aging that determines
how well you can convince your body that
this is actually happening wow so it's
used it's not used enough but it's used
in studies to prove things right it's
like all big data like this is the
result of just having so many people go
through the thing and looking at
correlations well there's they have this
and their life looks like that the big
data is what does each gene mean what is
its function
that's not actionable however because
that's not correlated to how does the
body work that's what we do that's
functional in nature meaning I can tell
you what each gene does but I a gene
isn't a individual instrument sitting in
the corner there's a symphony they all
play together right your hormone system
your brain system they're all
interacting overlaying so if you don't
understand those intersections which is
again the functional map as opposed to
this g means this this g means this all
you're going to end up ever end up with
is propensity eighty percent chance of
this 60 because we can't figure out why
there was a 40 Gap that's that
intersection between your methylation
and your detox your cardiovascular and
your hormones why do women get so much
worse cardiovascular disease because
they also have hormone toxicity you got
to look at them together you don't
separate cardiovascular from hormones
it's part of the problem right so
anyways going back to the kids
the my middle son
uh wouldn't do his homework
all boys
um the youngest is a girl okay right
who's the smartest out of the family so
uh middle one wouldn't do his homework
he and this is It's just such an easy
fix which is why I like to talk about
this because it seems like such a
complicated problem but such an easy fix
he would crash and burn on the floor and
what do you when a kid won't do his
homework it's like discipline problem uh
you know motivation mode you use that's
what you lean on and that's what you
Target and then when those things don't
get worked there's friction and that kid
becomes in the bad bucket right so what
was actually happening I looked at his
genome and I didn't look at a homework
Gene I just looked at what was broken
and the glaring red flag was there was
some stuff in wooden Behavior which is
why he reacted to the level he did but
why react in the first place
he didn't metabolize starch as well the
Amy Gene determines how well you convert
starch into glucose and use it as fuel
he has the worst possible profile there
his insulin response there's a gene that
determines how well you utilize insulin
worst possible profile
Hallmark was after dinner every day
in a South Asian home where he was
eating rice and none
right heavy starch carb intake
and all we were doing was putting him
into a coma right before the carb crash
we all know about he was having that
every day right before homework and his
brain just wasn't functioning
now all of a sudden two things schedule
is food or his homework sorry before
dinner because even because his insulin
response is so poor even if you take the
carbs and starches out he's still gonna
have a bit of you know slow down and he
needs to he needs time to catch up but
he doesn't eat starches anymore because
we don't want him to get type 2 diabetes
he's that kid what why at 25 did this
kid get diabetes
why because he's not designed to eat the
North American diet or even my ancestral
diet he's not designed for right but my
ancestral diet as I believe it is what I
know they're eating back home today
which they didn't eat three generations
ago that's not true right three
generations ago there was uh many
thousands of versions of grain which we
now have a pool of four or five that we
pull from that are highly glutenous that
are luxurious and soft and fun to eat
right so food isn't what it was even
three generations ago
that this is really really interesting
so if I had kids one thousand percent I
would get their genome sequenced I don't
think I would tell them though yeah
do you worry about that or am I crazy no
there's certain things that I don't talk
to them about right and there's certain
things when it comes to the things that
they need ownership on right give me an
example uh so for example
you remember earlier I was talking about
the dopamine pathway and how I'm highly
reward seeking my eldest son has mom's
genes and so he has a little bit he's
more tendons this tendency leans towards
binding more dopamine in a slower
pathway so we had this constant friction
on the way I think work work needs to
get done and the way he think works
needs to get done and we would we argued
about it for years and years and years
until I did his DNA I understood that
he's truly perceiving the world
differently than I am I have a burning
desire in my gut to get things done
he has a burning desire to only do the
things that he truly enjoys and sees
value in and everything else is fluff
dude husbands and wives need to do this
yeah oh my I can't tell you how many in
our research phase
the majority of our clinical research
calls turned into couples therapy um
that's why that's why that's why now I
understand there's a gene called adria2b
which determines to what degree do you
imprint negative stimulus trauma
I can predict the PTSD the PTSD yeah I
can predict if you if you do and why is
it that hubby your wife says that you're
cold and you don't care and you don't
feel and why is it that hubby your wife
says not this again
because they're holding The Grudge on
whatever that thing is because they
imprint it so the next time something
like that happens again They're bringing
back all the baggage of the last time
PTSD yeah right there's some people for
whom it's an imprint where it becomes a
actual functional emotional intelligence
but if their bdnf is also off the thing
that drives neuroplasticity then they
also get what's called shell shock
so they imprint the feeling but it's
also impactful so they give it a lot of
meaning that's where PTSD comes from
we've done this work with the US
military so we've sat there with Black
Ops Special Forces and determine who
should actually be front line pulling
the trigger who's going to be hesitant
who can actually pull the trigger who's
going to come back with trauma and PTSD
when they're doing these simulation type
activities how do you actually uh at a
personalized level determine if the guy
did a good job or not based on his
capacity right I'm going to ask again
are we slaves to our DNA
here's who you are right that your DNA
is telling you who you are in your brain
function in your cardiovascular function
uh your ability to metabolize macro
micronutrients the things you're doing
are going to pull you in directions one
way or the other when it comes to mood
and behavior you have to be in the right
context that is truly the thing that
will make you mentally healthy
right if you're designed to be a warrior
right if you're designed to strive and
seek reward if you every details matters
if you bind a little bit of trauma so
you're meant to hold on to that weight
and fight
but you're a cashier
you're going to be miserable
right but there's some people that
that's the happiest they'll ever be as
if they're that cashier um right because
none of this stuff matters to them so
it's it starts with understanding the
very first thing I said personalize who
am I
now I know what context I'm designed for
and I can thrive
I can Thrive both in health both in mood
and aging as slow as possible so it's a
combination of knowing what I do then
environmental nutrition lifestyle
choices I have to make and putting that
in the right context that equals
whatever you want longevity good
relationships you know achieving your
goals all that stuff
man this I can think a few things more
fascinating than this
my wife often jokes that oh I wish I had
your memory yeah now the reason she says
that is I have a terrible memory so
things don't stay with me yeah good or
bad so if something bad happens I will
completely forget that it happened yeah
and so when we left our last company
Quest
I didn't miss a beat didn't even think
about it yeah literally my last day at
Quest was Monday and then my first aid
impact theory was Tuesday and for Lisa
it was like even though
she was ready to go it was
there was just something about like but
that is a part of who I am and
it just it thinks like really
imprint on her in a way that they don't
on me and I I am hyper malleable so I
can and I mean it's interesting because
I teach people how to do this in Impact
Theory University and I often wonder I
find this very easy to do and then other
people really struggle with it like I'll
tell people hey you can build desire
like there's actually a process of how
to reinforce it using biology to
take advantage of the fact that your
brain will create a story it will
justify whatever amplitude reaction you
give something so if you react largely
to something your brain goes whoa then I
guess we feel strongly about this and if
you do it enough like it really you'll
actually get the emotion hardwired into
you
and I'm like now do I just find this
easier than most people because I find
that works for me
extraordinarily well but I know other
people can struggle with it for sure
very interesting for sure so do you
remember
um I don't know how long this was maybe
15 years ago there was a genocide in
Rwanda the I think they're called the
Tutsis these two tribes were killing
each other and one of their common
tactics was cut the person off of the
arms or the elbows because now you make
them economically a problem also it's
not just you know killing them off but
let's make them suffer economically that
was the terrorism that they used on each
other
so imagine that trauma of people coming
into your tribe watching your son's arms
getting chopped off right imagine that
yeah as soon as the war was over these
two people the hutus and the Tutsis were
friends in the market selling to each
other as if it never happened the guy at
the elbows that had his arms cut off was
working with the guy that cut his arms
off Jesus
right can how old is that possible for
that to happen because
the genetics that you're describing of
yourself is probably the same and we
went back to this earlier the fast
clearance of dopamine so the ability to
just move on and think about the next
thing and the inability to actually bind
the pain and Trauma which speaks to your
capacity to just move on think instead
of feel and to not remember the bad
thing that happened because you actually
don't remember you have to actually
imprint a feeling to be able to then
recall it and use it as a tool and if
you don't do that all you remember is
the information the intellect part of it
not the feeling part of it that's what
you do
right so this is where by understanding
this now everybody going through your
process you've designed something that
it explains your success right it
explains how you became who you are
people that are like you are going to
thrive
with that information the people that
are like Lisa right maybe they feel a
little bit more maybe it lasts a little
longer and I'm assuming some of these
things using her as an example maybe
it's not going to work so well for them
but now you know if they knew this about
themselves they know exactly what to add
or delete to make this thing work
because your system works there's no
doubt that it works there may be some
other tool that they also need
or something they need to remove yeah
and customize it all sudden they also
Thrive right that's so powerful like
what a useful addition whether it's how
to exercise how to eat whatever the case
may be it's really extraordinary all
right this is all mind-blowing man where
can people follow you uh so me uh
Instagram is Cash con officials okay Ash
Colin k-h-a-n uh we're at the DNA
company.com
and we launched a podcast for our own
audience it was just an educational tool
someone buys a test they want to learn
more so these scenarios you're hearing
about if you want to hear more about
autism whatever go to unpilled the
unpilled podcast and that's where we
teach you about the way we think love it
yeah boys and girls if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care peace if you want to learn how to
slow down and even reverse aging click
here now so now buddy we have two types
of information when we're born or even
when we're conceived there's the one
that we all know about we can get out
DNA red that's the genome
but there's this other layer
called the epige